AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
Attend an AP Workshop
Host an AP Workshop
AP in Practice Series
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
AP Computer Science A
Active Page:
The Exam
The Exam
AP Computer Science A
Sign In to AP Classroom
Article
Review the Free-Response Questions from the AP Exam
The Course
Course Audit
Classroom Resources
The Exam
Professional Learning
Exam Overview
This is a fully digital exam. Students complete multiple-choice and free-response questions in the Bluebook testing app, with all responses automatically submitted at the end of the exam. The Java Quick Reference (.pdf) is included in Bluebook and lists the accessible methods from the Java library that may be included on the exam.  Schools can print this reference information and provide it to students on exam day.
Exam questions assess the course concepts and skills outlined in the course framework. For more information, download the AP Computer Science A Course and Exam Description (.pdf) (CED). Scoring guidelines for each of the sample free-response questions in the CED are also available.
Encourage your students to visit the AP Computer Science A student page for exam information.
Exam Date
Wed, May 12, 2027 | Session 2
AP Computer Science A Exam
Get Details About Start Times
Exam Format
Section I: Multiple Choice
42 Questions | 1 Hour 30 Minutes | 55% of Exam Score
The multiple-choice section includes mostly individual questions, occasionally with 1–2 sets of questions (2 questions per set).
Computational Thinking Practices 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 are all assessed in the multiple-choice section.
Section II: Free Response
4 Questions | 1 Hour 30 Minutes | 45% of Exam Score
All free-response questions assess Computational Thinking Practice 2: Develop Code, with the following focus:
Question 1: Methods and Control Structures—Students will write 2 methods or 1 constructor and 1 method of a given class based on provided specifications and examples. In Part A the method or constructor will require students to write iterative or conditional statements, or both, as well as statements that call methods in the specified class. In Part B the method or constructor will require calling String methods.
Question 2: Class Design—Students will be instructed to design and implement a class based on provided specifications and examples. A second class might also be included. Students will be provided with a scenario and specifications in the form of a table demonstrating ways to interact with the class and the results. The class must include a class header, instance variables, a constructor, a method, and implementation of the constructor and required method.
Question 3: Data Analysis with ArrayList—Students will be provided with a scenario and its associated class(es). Students will write 1 method of a given class based on provided specifications and examples. The method requires students to use, analyze, and manipulate data in an ArrayList structure.
Question 4: 2D Array—Students will be provided with a scenario and its associated class(es). Students will write 1 method of a given class based on provided specifications and examples. The method requires students to use, analyze, and manipulate data in a 2D array structure.
Test Previews for Digital AP Exams
Link
Practice on Bluebook
Download the Bluebook app and log in with your College Board account information to access test previews for the digital AP Exams.
Reference Information
Reference materials are available for this course and will be printed and mailed to schools, in addition to being available in Bluebook in the test preview and on exam day.
Article
Reference Information for Specific AP Exams
Access reference sheets and exam day details.
Exam Questions and Scoring Information
Article
AP Computer Science A Exam Questions and Scoring Information
View free-response questions from past exams.
Score Reporting
Link
AP Score Reports for Educators
Access your score reports.
