AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
Active Page:
AP Computer Science A
The Course
AP Computer Science A
Sign In to AP Classroom
Adopt AP Computer Science A at Your School
Explore the Benefits
The Course
Course Audit
Classroom Resources
The Exam
Professional Learning
Course Overview
AP Computer Science A is an introductory college-level computer science course. Students cultivate their understanding of coding through analyzing, writing, and testing code as they explore concepts like modularity, variables, and control structures.
Course and Exam Description
Download
AP Computer Science A Course and Exam Description
This is the core document for this course. It clearly lays out the course content and describes the exam and the AP Program in general.
PDF
4.01 MB
Download
AP Computer Science A Course and Exam Description Clarifications and Corrections
This document provides teachers with clarifications and/or corrections for the AP Computer Science A Course and Exam Description.
PDF
76.59 KB
Course Resources
Download
AP Computer Science A Course Overview
This resource provides a succinct description of the course and exam.
PDF
145.03 KB
Download
AP Computer Science A Course at a Glance
Excerpted from the AP Computer Science A Course and Exam Description, the Course at a Glance document outlines the topics and skills covered in the AP Computer Science A course, along with suggestions for sequencing.
PDF
180.89 KB
Link
The Difference Between AP Computer Science Principles and AP Computer Science A
Learn the similarities and differences between these two courses and exams.
Download
AP Computer Science A Course at a Glance Poster
Print the Course at a Glance poster to use for reference in the classroom.
PDF
154.96 KB
Recruitment
Article
Bring AP Computer Science A to Your School
Find step-by-step instructions for implementing AP Computer Science A at your school.
Article
Recruitment Toolkit
Use the resources in this toolkit to recruit students in your school for the AP Computer Science A course.
Article
How to Attract Students to Computer Science
Learn how a teacher leverages school events, counselors, and fellow teachers to attract students to computer science courses.
Course Content
Based on the Understanding by Design® (Wiggins and McTighe) model, this course framework provides a description of the course requirements necessary for student success, with a focus on core principles, theories, and processes of the discipline. The framework also encourages instruction that prepares students for advanced computer science coursework and its integration into a wide array of STEM-related fields.
The AP Computer Science A framework is organized into four commonly taught units of study that provide one possible sequence for the course. As always, you have the flexibility to organize the course content as you like.
Unit
Exam Weighting (Multiple-Choice Section)
Unit 1: Using Objects and Methods
15%–25%
Unit 2: Selection and Iteration
25%–35%
Unit 3: Class Creation
10%–18%
Unit 4: Data Collections
30%–40%
Computational Thinking Practices
The AP Computer Science A framework included in the course and exam description outlines distinct skills, called computational thinking practices, that students should practice throughout the year—skills that will help them learn to think and act like computer scientists.
Practice
Description
Exam Weighting (Multiple-Choice Section)
1. Design Code
Determine an appropriate program design and develop algorithms.
2%–10%
2. Develop Code
Write and implement program code.
22%–38%
3. Analyze Code
Determine the output or result of a given program code or explain why code may not work as intended.
37%–53%
4. Document Code and Computing Systems
Describe the behavior and conditions that produce specified results in a program.
10%–15%
5. Use Computers Responsibly
Understand the ethical and social implications of computer use.
2%–10%
AP and Higher Education
Higher education professionals play a key role in developing AP courses and exams, setting credit and placement policies, and scoring student work. The AP Higher Education section features information on recruitment and admission, advising and placement, and more.
This chart shows recommended scores for granting credit, and how much credit should be awarded, for each AP course. Your students can look up credit and placement policies for colleges and universities on the AP Credit Policy Search .
AP Course and Exam Development
The AP Program is unique in its reliance on development committees for their initial and ongoing voice in course and exam development. These committees, made up of an equal number of college faculty and experienced secondary AP teachers from across the country, are essential to the preparation of AP course curricula and exams.
Article
How AP Develops Courses and Exams
Learn what the development committees do and the methodology they use to develop AP courses and exams.
Article
AP Development Committees
Find development committee information for all AP courses.
