AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
Attend an AP Workshop
Host an AP Workshop
AP in Practice Series
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
AP Computer Science Principles
Active Page:
The Exam
The Exam
AP Computer Science Principles
Sign In to AP Classroom
Article
Review the Free-Response Questions from the AP Exam
The Course
Course Audit
Classroom Resources
The Exam
Professional Learning
Exam Overview
The AP Computer Science Principles Exam assesses student understanding of the computational thinking practices and learning objectives outlined in the course framework. The AP Exam consists of the Create performance task and an end-of-course exam. The end-of-course exam is a fully digital exam in the Bluebook testing app, and it includes multiple-choice questions and two written-response questions that require students to demonstrate their understanding of the Create performance task. All responses in Bluebook will be automatically submitted at the end of the exam.
For more information, download the AP Computer Science Principles Course and Exam Description (.pdf) (CED).
Encourage your students to visit the AP Computer Science Principles student page for exam information.
Assessment Dates
Fri, Apr 30, 2027
11:59 PM ET
Deadline: Students Submit AP Computer Science Principles Performance Task
This is the deadline for students to complete all required components of the Create performance task and submit as final in the AP Digital Portfolio.
Add
to Calendar
Fri, May 14, 2027 | Session 1
AP Computer Science Principles End-of-Course Exam
Get Details About Start Times
Exam Format
The AP Computer Science Principles end-of-course exam has consistent question types and weighting every year, so you and your students know what to expect on exam day.
Section I: End-of-Course Multiple-Choice Exam
70 multiple-choice questions | 120 minutes | 70% of score | 4 answer options
57 single-select multiple-choice
5 single-select with reading passage about a computing innovation
8 multiple-select multiple-choice: select 2 answers
Section II: Create Performance Task and Written Response
30% of score
Create performance task program code, video, and Personalized Project Reference | 9 hours in-class
2 written response questions | 60-minute end-of-course exam
The second section of the AP Computer Science Principles Exam consists of a through-course Create performance task where students will develop a computer program of their choice and an end-of-course written response section where students demonstrate their understanding of their personal Create performance task by answering two questions. Students will be provided 9 hours of in-class time to complete their program, record a video of their program running, and develop a Personalized Project Reference.
On the end-of-course exam, students will respond to two questions related to the code in their Personalized Project Reference. The two questions include four distinct prompts: Written Response 1, Written Response 2(a), Written Response 2(b), and Written Response 2(c). Students will have access to their Personalized Project Reference while responding to these prompts. The four categories listed below align to the four prompts.
Prompt Category
Required Learning Objectives
Written Response 1: Program Design, Function, and Purpose
Students should be prepared to respond to prompts about their program that assess any of the following learning objectives:
CRD-2.A: Describe the purpose of a computing innovation.
CRD-2.B: Explain how a program or code segment functions.
CRD-2.C: Identify input(s) to a program.
CRD-2.D: Identify output(s) produced by a program.
CRD-2.E: Develop a program using a development process.
CRD-2.F: Design a program and its user interface.
CRD-2.G: Describe the purpose of a code segment or program by writing documentation.
Written Response 2(a): Algorithm Development
Students should be prepared to respond to prompts about their program that assess any of the following learning objectives:
CRD-2.B: Explain how a program or code segment functions.
AAP-2.E.b: Evaluate expressions that use relational operators.
AAP-2.F.b: Evaluate expressions that use logic operators.
AAP-2.H.b: Determine the result of conditional statements.
AAP-2.J: Express an algorithm that uses iteration without using a programming language.
AAP-2.K.b: Determine the result or side effect of iteration statements.
AAP-2.L: Compare multiple algorithms to determine if they yield the same side effect or result.
AAP-2.M.a: Create algorithms.
AAP-2.M.b: Combine and modify existing algorithms.
Written Response 2(b): Errors and Testing
Students should be prepared to respond to prompts about their program that assess any of the following learning objectives:
CRD-2.I.a: Identify the error.
CRD-2.I.b: Correct the error.
CRD-2.J: Identify inputs and corresponding expected outputs or behaviors that can be used to check the correctness of an algorithm or program.
Written Response 2(c): Data and Procedural Abstraction
Students should be prepared to respond to prompts about their program that assess any of the following learning objectives:
AAP-1.D.a: Develop data abstraction using lists to store multiple elements.
AAP-1.D.b: Explain how the use of data abstraction manages complexity in program code.
AAP-2.O.a: Write iteration statements to traverse a list.
AAP-2.O.b: Determine the result of an algorithm that includes list traversals.
AAP-3.B: Explain how the use of procedural abstraction manages complexity in a program.
AP Digital Portfolio
Review these resources for guidance on how to use the AP Digital Portfolio and sign in.
Link
Sign In to the AP Digital Portfolio
Sign in to the AP Digital Portfolio using your College Board account.
Article
About the AP Digital Portfolio
Get an overview of what the AP Digital Portfolio is and how it works.
Download
AP Digital Portfolio: Teacher User Guide for 2026-27
This guide helps teachers navigate the AP Digital Portfolio and complete tasks specific to their course.
PDF
3.99 MB
Download
AP Digital Portfolio: Student User Guide for 2026-27
This guide helps students navigate the AP Digital Portfolio.
PDF
2.43 MB
Test Previews for Digital AP Exams
Link
Practice on Bluebook
Download the Bluebook app and log in with your College Board account information to access test previews for the digital AP Exams.
Reference Information
Reference materials are available for this course and will be printed and mailed to schools, in addition to being available in Bluebook in the test preview and on exam day.
Article
Reference Information for Specific AP Exams
Access reference sheets and exam day details.
Resources
Download
AP Computer Science Principles Student Handouts
Get detailed directions for completing the Create performance task.
PDF
374.81 KB
Download
AP Computer Science Principles Personalized Project Reference Tip Sheet
This tip sheet will help your students understand the guidelines for creating a readable Personalized Project Reference, which must be submitted as final by the deadline in the AP Digital Portfolio for access on exam day.
PDF
207.93 KB
Link
AP Classroom Resources
Access formative topic questions—including those to help scaffold the Create performance task written responses—summative practice questions, and AP Videos on each course topic.
Article
Frequently Asked Questions
Find answers to common questions about the course, exam, digital portfolio, Create performance task, plagiarism and AI, AP Course Audit, and more.
Exam Questions and Scoring Information
Article
AP Computer Science Principles Exam Questions and Scoring Information
View exam materials and scoring information from past exams.
Score Reporting
Link
AP Score Reports for Educators
Access your score reports.
