AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
Active Page:
AP Computer Science Principles
The Course
AP Computer Science Principles
Sign In to AP Classroom
Adopt AP Computer Science Principles at Your School
Explore the Benefits
The Course
Course Audit
Classroom Resources
The Exam
Professional Learning
Course Overview
AP Computer Science Principles is an introductory college-level computing course that introduces students to the breadth of the field of computer science. Students learn to design and evaluate solutions and to apply computer science to solve problems through the development of algorithms and programs. They incorporate abstraction into programs and use data to discover new knowledge. Students also explain how computing innovations and computing systems—including the internet—work, explore their potential impacts, and contribute to a computing culture that is collaborative and ethical.
Course and Exam Description
Download
AP Computer Science Principles Course and Exam Description
This is the core document for this course. It lays out the course content and describes the exam and the AP Program in general.
PDF
7.15 MB
Download
AP Computer Science Principles Course and Exam Description Clarifications and Corrections
This document provides teachers with clarifications and/or corrections for the AP Computer Science Principles Course and Exam Description.
PDF
99.97 KB
Course Resources
Download
AP Computer Science Principles Course Overview
This resource provides a succinct description of the course and exam.
PDF
197.95 KB
Download
AP Computer Science Principles Course At A Glance
Excerpted from the AP Computer Science Principles Course and Exam Description, the Course at a Glance document outlines the topics and skills covered in the AP Computer Science Principles course.
PDF
153.76 KB
Link
The Difference Between AP Computer Science Principles and AP Computer Science A
Learn the similarities and differences between these two courses and exams.
FAQ
Article
CSP Frequently Asked Questions
Find answers to common questions about the course, exam, and AP Course Audit.
Research
Article
AP Computer Science Principles: Research Findings
Read our 2020 report presenting research showing that AP Computer Science Principles often serves as an entryway to STEM fields for female, Black, Hispanic, and first-generation students.
Recruitment
Article
Computer Science Recruitment Strategies
Provides additional tips for encouraging all students to enroll in computer science courses.
Article
CSP Recruitment Toolkit
Explore our collection of videos and downloadable resources to share with students, families, and educators to explain the benefits of the course.
Link
Why Take AP Computer Science Principles?
Learn how students benefit from taking AP Computer Science Principles.
Course Content
Based on the Understanding by Design ® (Wiggins and McTighe) model, the AP Computer Science Principles Course and Exam Description provides a clear and detailed description of the course requirements necessary for student success. The course is designed to be equivalent to a first-semester introductory college computing course for non-CS majors. The major areas of study in the course are organized around big ideas that encompass ideas foundational to studying computer science.
The AP Computer Science Principles course framework is organized into five big ideas. As always, you have the flexibility to organize the course content as you like.
Big Idea
Exam Weighting (Multiple-Choice Section)
Big Idea 1: Creative Development
10%–13%
Big Idea 2: Data
17%–22%
Big Idea 3: Algorithms and Programming
30%–35%
Big Idea 4: Computer Systems and Networks
11%–15%
Big Idea 5: Impact of Computing
21%–26%
Computational Thinking Practices
The AP Computer Science Principles course framework included in the course and exam description outlines distinct skills from computational thinking practices that students should practice and develop throughout the year—skills that will help them learn to think and act like computer scientists. Emphasis is placed on creativity and collaboration as pedagogical strategies to be used to develop a diverse, appealing, and inclusive classroom environment.
Computational Thinking Practice
Description
Exam Weighting (Multiple-Choice Section)
1. Computational Solution Design
Design and evaluate computational solutions for a purpose.
18%–25%
2. Algorithms and Program Development
Develop and implement algorithms.
20%–28%
3. Abstraction in Program Development
Develop programs that incorporate abstractions.
7%–12%
4. Code Analysis
Evaluate and test algorithms and programs.
12%–19%
5. Computing Innovations
Investigate computing innovations.
28%–33%
6. Responsible Computing
Contribute to an inclusive, safe, collaborative, and ethical computing culture.
Not assessed
AP and Higher Education
Higher education professionals play a key role in developing AP courses and exams, setting credit and placement policies, and scoring student work. The AP Higher Education section features information on recruitment and admission, advising and placement, and more.
Over 1,300 colleges and universities offer credit and placement policies for AP CSP. Your students can look up credit and placement policies for colleges and universities on the AP Credit Policy Search .
AP Course and Exam Development
The AP Program is unique in its reliance on development committees for their initial and ongoing voice in course and exam development. These committees, made up of an equal number of college faculty and experienced secondary AP teachers from across the country, are essential to the preparation of AP course curricula and exams.
Article
How AP Develops Courses and Exams
Learn what the development committees do and the methodology they use to develop AP courses and exams.
Article
AP Development Committees
Find development committee information for all AP courses.
