AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
Active Page:
AP Cybersecurity
The Course
AP Cybersecurity
Sign In to AP Classroom
Adopt AP Cybersecurity at Your School
Explore the Benefits
The Course
Course Audit
Classroom Resources
The Exam
Professional Learning
Course Overview
AP Cybersecurity trains students in the field and aligns closely with standard first-year collegiate cybersecurity courses. Students explore defense-in-depth strategies and learn to address specific vulnerabilities, attacks, mitigations, and detection measures across a variety of domains, including physical spaces, computer networks, devices, applications, and data. Developed in partnership with college faculty and industry leaders, this yearlong course aligns with the NICE Workforce Framework.
Course and Exam Description
Download
AP Cybersecurity Course and Exam Description
This is the core document for this course. Unit guides clearly lay out the course content and skills and recommend sequencing and pacing for them throughout the year.
PDF
5.67 MB
Download
AP Cybersecurity Course and Exam Description Clarifications and Corrections
This document provides teachers with clarifications and/or corrections for the AP Cybersecurity Course and Exam Description.
PDF
82.9 KB
Course Resources
Download
AP Cybersecurity Course Overview
This resource provides a succinct description of the course and exam.
PDF
86.29 KB
Download
AP Cybersecurity Course at a Glance
Excerpted from the AP Cybersecurity Course and Exam Description, the Course at a Glance document outlines the topics and skills covered in the AP Cybersecurity course, along with suggestions for sequencing.
PDF
1.03 MB
Download
AP Cybersecurity Course at a Glance Poster
Print the Course at a Glance poster to use for reference in the classroom.
PDF
181.04 KB
Course Content
The AP Cybersecurity course framework spirals three skill categories through the five units of the course. These three skills—Analyze Risk, Mitigate Risk, and Detect Attacks—are the themes that run throughout the course.
This course framework provides a clear and detailed description of the course requirements necessary for student success. The framework specifies what students must know, be able to do, and understand to qualify for college credit or placement.
The exam is weighted based on the skills students demonstrate as indicated in the table that follows.
Skill Category
Exam Weighting
Skill Category 1: Analyze Risk
25%–40%
Skill Category 2: Mitigate Risk
25%–40%
Skill Category 3: Detect Attacks
25%–40%
Course Skills
The AP Cybersecurity course framework outlines course skills that are critical to a deep understanding and application of cybersecurity knowledge and practice. Students should develop and use these skills throughout the course.
Skill Category 1
Skill Category 2
Skill Category 3
Skill Category 4
Analyze Risk
Evaluate risk to organizational assets.
Mitigate Risk
Implement protective and deterrent security controls.
Detect Attacks
Implement detection methods, monitor systems, and analyze evidence.
Collaborate
Work with others and AI to accomplish a task.
Communicating concepts
Explain key cybersecurity concepts
1.A Identify, with and without the support of AI, vulnerabilities, threats, and attack methods, and explain how they generate risk.
2.A Identify security controls, and explain how they mitigate risks.
3.A Identify methods for monitoring systems, and explain how they detect attacks.
4.A Develop clear, shared team objectives related to a cybersecurity task.
Investigating problems
Explore the parameters of a problem to plan for solutions
1.B Determine ways adversaries exploit vulnerabilities to compromise an asset.
2.B Determine layered security controls that address vulnerabilities.
3.B Determine strategies and methods to detect attacks.
4.B Determine clear roles and responsibilities for members of a team working to accomplish a cybersecurity task.
Assessing impacts
Evaluate impact on systems
1.C Evaluate, with and without the support of AI, the likelihood and impact of risks.
2.C Evaluate, with and without the support of AI, the impact of protective risk-management strategies.
3.C Evaluate the impact of threat detection methods.
4.C Implement AI as a collaboration tool individually and as a group.
Enacting solutions
Apply and communicate solutions
1.D Document, with and without the support of AI, the likelihood and impact of risks.
2.D Implement and log mitigations with and without the support of AI.
3.D Detect and classify cyberattacks by analyzing digital evidence with and without the support of AI.
4.D Complete assigned work to accomplish a collaborative cybersecurity task.
AP and Higher Education
Higher education professionals play a key role in developing AP courses and exams, setting credit and placement policies, and scoring student work. The AP Higher Education section features information on recruitment and admission, advising and placement, and more.
This chart shows recommended scores for granting credit, and how much credit should be awarded, for each AP course. Colleges and universities are actively working with the AP Program to establish credit policies for AP Cybersecurity. The first set of institutions granting credit for AP scores on this exam will be released in spring 2027.
AP Course and Exam Development
The AP Program is unique in its reliance on development committees for their initial and ongoing voice in course and exam development. These committees, made up of an equal number of college faculty and experienced secondary AP teachers from across the country, are essential to the preparation of AP course curricula and exams.
Article
How AP Develops Courses and Exams
Learn what the development committees do and the methodology they use to develop AP courses and exams.
Article
AP Development Committees
Find development committee information for all AP courses.
