AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
AP Cybersecurity
Active Page:
The Exam
The Exam
AP Cybersecurity
Sign In to AP Classroom
The Course
Course Audit
Classroom Resources
The Exam
Professional Learning
Exam Overview
This is a fully digital exam. Students complete multiple-choice and free-response questions in the Bluebook testing app, with all responses automatically submitted at the end of the exam.
Exam questions assess the course concepts and skills outlined in the course framework. For more information, download the AP Cybersecurity Course and Exam Description (.pdf) (CED).
Encourage your students to visit the AP Cybersecurity student page for exam information.
Exam Date
Wed, May 5, 2027 | Session 1
AP Cybersecurity Exam
Get Details About Start Times
Exam Format
The AP Cybersecurity Exam has consistent question types, weighting, and scoring guidelines, so you and your students know what to expect on exam day.
Section I: Multiple Choice
60 Questions | 80 Minutes | 70% of Exam Score
The multiple-choice section includes individual questions as well as sets of 2, 3, or 4 questions.
Students analyze scenarios and digital evidence to identify vulnerabilities, recommend mitigations, and detect potential threats.
Students explain key concepts in cybersecurity.
Section II: Free Response
1 Question | 50 Minutes | 30% of Exam Score
The free-response question gives students different sources of information from the same device, including:
a set of firewall rules
several system and application logs
a list of files with their permissions
a device policy
Students will use these sources to determine security issues, attacks, and how the system is configured.
The questions ask students to:
explain parts of the policy
find signs of attacks in the logs
configure file permissions and firewall rules
Using evidence from the sources, students will also suggest ways to make the device more secure and show how they could fix or harden the device.
Score Reporting
Link
AP Score Reports for Educators
Access your score reports.
