AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
AP Networking
Active Page:
AP Networking Pilot for 2026-27
Back
AP Networking Pilot for 2026-27
Get details about the AP Networking pilot course for the 2026-27 school year.
In the fall of 2026, the AP Program will launch a third and final pilot to test the course framework for AP Networking, part of our AP Career Kickstart™ group of courses, which are designed to accelerate high school students on their paths to in-demand careers.
Pilot Participation
Only schools that have previously participated in AP Networking or AP Cybersecurity pilots are eligible for the 2026-27 pilot program. Eligible schools should complete required steps in AP Course Audit as soon as possible to participate. The course will be available for schools nationwide starting in the 2027-28 school year.
About the Course
AP Networking trains students in the networking field and aligns closely with standard first-year collegiate networking courses. Students develop problem-solving and communication skills by configuring, securing, and troubleshooting networks of increasing scale. Through hands-on activities and real-world scenarios, students are encouraged to understand, design, and manage networks that enable functionalities such as streaming and communication, workplace collaboration, and resilient public infrastructure. Developed in partnership with college faculty and industry leaders, this yearlong course aligns with the NICE Workforce Framework.
Prerequisites
There are no specific prerequisites for AP Networking. Students should be motivated and willing to work both individually and in teams on college-level projects. AP Networking is designed to serve as a foundational course that aligns with multiple programs of study within career and technical education (CTE) digital technology pathways.
About the Exam
The AP Networking pilot exam is a digital exam that assesses knowledge and skills in the networking field. This exam puts students in the position of a network technician or administrator and uses career-connected scenarios to test their ability to make evidence-based, contextually aware decisions.
The pilot exam contains only multiple-choice questions and will be administered in May 2027. The exam date will be announced when it becomes available.
Resources for Teachers
AP Networking Course Framework
The AP Networking course framework provides a clear and detailed description of the course requirements necessary for student success. The framework specifies what students must know, understand, and be able to do to qualify for college credit and/or placement.
AP Classroom
Pilot teachers will have access to sample lesson plans, a pilot guide, and unit guides through AP Classroom. These resources will be available in AP Classroom starting July 2026. Note: There is no practice exam available for pilot courses.
Professional Learning Opportunities
Pilot teachers can participate in select professional learning offerings for AP Networking, such as virtual AP Summer Institutes. There are limited spots available, so if you’re interested in participating in a virtual session, explore the event calendar and register by July 10, 2026.
Online AP Community
Additional instructional resources will be shared with Course Audit–approved pilot teachers through the AP Networking pilot online teacher community.
Questions? Get in Touch
Email
[email protected]
FAQ
Expand All
Collapse All
Can students earn college credit for the AP Networking pilot exam?
Students who earn a qualifying score on the AP Networking pilot exam, typically a 3 or higher, can earn college credit at institutions where credit policies are in place. Credit policies may be limited for the AP Networking pilot. Our teams are working diligently to establish credit policies at institutions across the country in advance of the 2027-28 course launch.
Read more
Will AP Networking contribute to weighted GPA?
We recommend that high schools offer weighted GPA benefits to students enrolled in AP courses, including the AP Networking pilot course.
Read more
Will AP Networking pilot students be able to earn an employer-endorsed credential in the 2026-27 school year?
No. The credential will be available when the course launches nationally in the 2027-28 school year.
Read more
AP Networking Course Framework
Download the Framework
AP Networking Course Framework
Download the Framework
