AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
AP Networking
Active Page:
About AP Networking
Back
About AP Networking
This new AP career course helps students develop the technical and professional career skills they need to prepare for opportunities in networking, information technology, and related fields.
Modern economies rely on secure, reliable computer networks to power communication, business operations, and digital services. Yet many students have limited access to foundational networking education in high school. AP Networking helps meet this need by introducing students to the core concepts and practical skills used to design, configure, manage, secure, and troubleshoot computer networks, preparing students for a range of postsecondary pathways and careers.
About the Course
In the 2026-27 school year, select schools will participate in a third and final pilot. AP Networking will be available for all schools in the 2027-28 school year.
AP Networking trains students in the field and aligns closely with standard first-year collegiate networking courses. Students develop problem-solving and communication skills by configuring, securing, and troubleshooting networks of increasing scale. Through hands-on activities and real-world scenarios, students are encouraged to understand, design, and manage networks that enable functionalities such as streaming and communication, workplace collaboration, and resilient public infrastructure. Developed in partnership with college faculty and industry leaders, this yearlong course aligns with the NICE Workforce Framework.
AP Networking is part of the AP Career Kickstart™ group of courses, which are designed to accelerate high school students on their paths to in-demand careers.
AP Networking Course Framework
The course framework is organized into four units that reflect a range of different network sizes and levels of complexity:
Unit 1: Managing My Connections
Unit 2: Managing My Shared Connections
Unit 3: Managing Many Connections
Unit 4: Managing Our Global Connections
Scenarios at the start of each unit offer authentic situations that are designed to connect the knowledge and skills students gain in the first topic to relevant, real-world applications. Each scenario is paired with relevant student activities.
Course Skills
The AP Networking course framework outlines course skills that are critical to understanding and applying networking concepts and practices. Students should develop and use these skills throughout the course.
Skill Category 1
Skill Category 2
Skill Category 3
Skill Category 4
Connect and Configure
Enable data transmission through computer networks.
Secure
Apply protective, detective, and deterrent security controls.
Troubleshoot
Diagnose causes of degraded performance or functionality, and test potential solutions to resolve problems.
Collaborate
Work with others and AI to accomplish a task
1.A Identify common device and network components, protocols, and configurations, and explain processes and relationships in computer networking.
2.A Identify vulnerabilities and their impacts in data, devices, and networks, and explain how security controls, with and without AI integration, can mitigate vulnerabilities and monitor networks.
3.A Identify common device and network problems, and explain how tools, including AI, can be used to diagnose the causes of the problems.
4.A Develop clear, shared team objectives related to a networking task.
1.B Determine, with and without the support of AI, the appropriate configurations and settings for network devices to enable connectivity, management, and performance.
2.B Determine, with and without the support of AI, mitigation strategies to address device and network vulnerabilities.
3.B Determine, with and without the support of AI, the causes of common device and network problems and determine potential solutions to solve those problems.
4.B Determine clear roles and responsibilities for members of a team working to accomplish a networking task.
1.C Implement and document device and network configurations to establish and maintain connectivity.
2.C Implement and document security controls to address potential vulnerabilities and monitor networks.
3.C Implement and document a potential solution to solve a problem.
4.C Implement AI as a collaboration tool individually and as a group.
1.D Verify connectivity and configurations of devices and networks, and apply the troubleshooting skills to resolve any problems.
2.D Verify that security controls mitigate the intended vulnerability while maintaining access and availability, and apply troubleshooting skills to resolve any problems.
3.D Verify the success of a solution and continue applying troubleshooting skills if needed.
4.D Complete assigned work to accomplish a collaborative networking task.
AP Networking Course Development
Every AP course is designed—and regularly updated—to include current data, evidence, and findings in each discipline. AP courses are designed to include the content and skills most frequently taught in introductory college courses, so that students who demonstrate mastery on the AP Exam can be placed into upper-division college courses with a strong foundation for success.
The AP Networking course was built in partnership with industry advisors, higher education faculty, high school educators, and career and technical education (CTE) leaders to expand national access to outstanding cybersecurity education that today is only available in some communities. These advisors were engaged to evaluate the research; recommend course skills, scope, and sequence; and review elements of the course framework and the AP Exam.
Credit and Placement
The AP Program engaged networking and information technology faculty from colleges and universities to ensure that AP Networking reflects the academic rigor of introductory college courses in the field. Students with qualifying AP Networking Exam scores can earn credit or placement in required or elective courses at colleges and universities.
Industry Recognition
The AP Program partnered with industry leaders to ensure the course skills align with employer demand for core requirements in high-growth and high-demand jobs. Along with the potential to earn college credit, students with qualifying scores on the exam will earn the AP Networking Credential. Created in partnership with industry experts, AP Career Kickstart employer-endorsed credentials accelerate students’ progress toward in-demand careers and align with the needs of employers, college-level coursework, and secondary CTE programs.
Supporting Teachers
Course Framework
The AP Networking course framework provides a clear and detailed description of the course requirements necessary for student success. The framework specifies what students must know, understand, and be able to do to qualify for college credit or placement and to earn the AP Networking Credential.
Professional Learning
Teachers can participate in select professional learning offerings for AP Networking such as AP Summer Institutes (APSI) and AP Workshops. Visit Professional Learning Opportunities for more information.
Online AP Community
The AP Networking online community for the 2027-28 school year will be a space for AP teachers and coordinators to connect with colleagues, participate in lively discussions with experts, and share classroom-ready materials. The community will also offer optional email updates to help make the most of your AP Networking classroom.
Resources
Article
AP Development Committees
Find development committee information for all AP courses.
AP Networking Course Framework
Download the Framework
Related Topics
AP Networking Exam Overview
AP Networking Course Framework
Download the Framework
Related Topics
AP Networking Exam Overview
