AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
Active Page:
AP Networking
AP CAREER KICKSTART
Adopt AP Networking
This new AP career course helps students develop the technical and professional career skills needed to build, manage, and secure computer networks.
What Is AP Networking?
Developed with college faculty and industry leaders, AP Networking is a yearlong course that combines college-level learning with practical, career-connected skill building. Through hands-on activities and real-world scenarios, students learn how devices communicate, how networks are configured and maintained, how data is transmitted reliably and securely across systems, and how to troubleshoot problems with devices and networks. The course offers students the opportunity to earn college credit and an employer-endorsed credential.
Learn More About the Course
Why Offer the Course?
Networking skills are essential across today’s technology-driven economy. Launching in 2027-28, AP Networking will prepare students for in-demand opportunities in information technology and related fields while expanding access to college-level coursework. Plus, the course can be easily tailored to fit into existing career and technical education (CTE) programs of study, helping schools support both college and career readiness.
AP Networking Exam
Students with qualifying exam scores will earn two benefits.
College Credit and Placement
Students with qualifying exam scores can earn credit at colleges and universities.
Employer-Endorsed Credential
Students with qualifying exam scores earn a credential they can apply toward further training or in the workforce.
Learn More About the Exam
Pilot and Course Framework
AP Networking will be in its third and final pilot in 2026-27. Find details about the pilot and explore the course framework.
AP Networking Pilot for 2026-27
Find information and resources for the pilot.
Get Pilot Details
AP Networking Course Framework
Review course details in the course framework.
Download the Framework
