AP Central
Explore AP by Role
Dates & Deadlines
About AP
AP at a Glance
Start and Expand Your AP Program
AP Collaborations and Outreach
What AP Stands For
AP Data and Research
BigFuture School and Connections
AP Courses & Exams
AP Courses and Exams
AP Courses in Development
AP Course Audit
Past Free-Response Questions
Exam Ordering, Administration & Scores
Exam Dates
Ordering and Fees
Administering Exams
Accommodations for AP Exams
Scores
AP Coordinator Resource Library
Instructional Resources
Sign In to AP Classroom
AP Classroom Overview
How to Get Started in AP Classroom
Teaching AP for the First Time?
Professional Learning
Professional Learning Opportunities
AP Summer Institutes
AP Workshops
AP Community
AP Coordinators
Become an AP Reader
Become a Professional Learning Consultant
AP Project Based Learning Series
Help
More
Display Site Navigation
Home
AP Courses and Exams
About AP Career Kickstart
AP Career Kickstart Credentials
Active Page:
AP Networking Credential
Back
AP Networking Credential
The AP Networking Credential, available beginning in the 2027-28 school year, helps students launch their careers by showcasing skills that industry needs to build and maintain robust networks.
As an AP Career Kickstart™ course, AP Networking offers students the opportunity to earn an employer-endorsed credential in the networking field.
The credential validates an emerging analyst’s skills to configure network hardware, use protocols to enable reliable and accurate transmission of data between hosts, and protect the transmission of data within and between computer networks. Credential holders demonstrate mastery through their ability to apply these skills in real-world scenarios and performance tasks, making them valuable assets to any organization.
High school students earn the credential after taking a yearlong AP Networking course and then achieving a qualifying score on the AP Networking Exam.
Technical Skills
The AP Networking Credential validates the recognized professional skills outlined in the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Workforce Framework.
Designing a secure network:
Determining appropriate endpoints, network appliances, transmission media, and communication protocols to meet network requirements
Enabling reliable, accurate, and secure transmission in the context of the OSI and TCP/IP models
Configuring a secure network:
Constructing, connecting, and documenting network components using appropriate media, communication protocols, and commands
Troubleshooting common issues by testing connectivity, verifying configuration, and monitoring congestion
Protecting computer networks:
Identifying potential vulnerabilities in data, devices, and networks
Implementing security controls that address potential vulnerabilities
About the Course
AP Networking trains students in the field and aligns closely with standard first-year collegiate introductory networking courses. Students blend learning essential networking concepts with relevant, hands-on problem-solving activities to maximize their understanding of network hardware, logical and physical configuration, the use of protocols to enable reliable and accurate transmission of data between hosts, and relevant security practices that protect the transmission of data within and between computer networks.
Students learn the value of configuring devices and networks with a “security-first” mindset to mitigate common vulnerabilities. Students work collaboratively to connect, configure, troubleshoot, and secure devices and networks while building critical thinking and communication skills.
About the Exam
The AP Networking Exam for May 2028 is a digital exam of essential technical skills in the networking field. This exam puts students in the position of an analyst, leveraging career-connected scenarios to test their skills and ability to make evidence-based, contextually aware decisions.
The digital exam is divided into two sections:
Multiple Choice: These questions connect to real-world job scenarios and test both knowledge and application.
Free Response: These questions use real networking artifacts and evidence for students to analyze and provide responses.
Students with qualifying scores will earn the AP Networking Credential.
How the Credential Can Be Applied
The AP Networking Credential supports student progression into multiple postgraduation career and education options.
Join the Workforce
Early Career Development: The AP Networking Credential is aligned with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework, preparing students to succeed in their careers. Course knowledge and skills also align with the internships and apprenticeships visible through the NICE Cybersecurity Apprenticeship Program Finder.
Career Connections: The AP Networking Credential prepares students with qualifying skills for high-demand, high-growth jobs, such as:
Computer Network Support Specialist
Network and Computer Systems Administrator
Computer and Information Systems Manager
Computer Systems Engineer/Architect
Computer Systems Analyst
Computer User Support Specialist
Information Security Engineer
Information Security Analyst
Visit BigFuture to explore more information technology careers.
Pursue a Degree or Certificate
Students with a qualifying score on the AP Networking Exam could earn up to 3 credits to apply to a relevant community college degree, four-year degree, or certificate program.
Stack Employer-Endorsed Credentials
Students can earn “stackable” credentials throughout their education and professional development, apply them to entry-level jobs and to college, and leverage them to earn positions that provide good salaries in high-growth industries. The AP Networking Credential is aligned with common industry certifications including CompTIA Network+, Cisco Certified Networking Associate (CCNA), and Cisco Certified Support Technician (CCST): Networking.
AP Networking Advisory Committees
The AP Networking course and Credential are developed with faculty and industry experts.
Meet Our Higher Education Advisory Committee:
Dane Brown, U.S. Cyber Team Coach, Annapolis, Md.
Jun Dai, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, Mass.
Melissa Dark, DARK Enterprises, Inc., Lafayette, Ind.
Chance Folmar, Front Range Community College, Westminster, Colo.
Charles Gardner, Cyber Innovation Center, Bossier City, La.
Tommy Gober, Infosec Institute, Mason, Ohio
Angel Hueca, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pa.
Terri Johnson Akse, University of Colorado–Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs, Colo.
Kyle Jones, Sinclair Community College, Dayton, Ohio
Bekah Michael, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
Michael Qaissaunee, Brookdale Community College, Lincroft, N.J.
Diego Tibaquirá, Miami Dade College, Miami, Fla.
Anthony Tsetse, Northern Kentucky University, Highland Heights, Ky.
Meet Our Industry Advisory Committee:
Charles Banks, U.S. Bank, Cincinnati, Ohio
Carol Kim, IBM, New York, N.Y.
Dr. Cynthia Sutherland, Amazon Web Services, Seattle, Wash.
Related Topics
AP Career Kickstart Credentials Overview
AP Career Kickstart Industry Advisors
AP Cybersecurity Credential
Related Topics
AP Career Kickstart Credentials Overview
AP Career Kickstart Industry Advisors
AP Cybersecurity Credential
