TEACHER GUIDE

Topic 1.4: Assignment Statements and Input

2 days | Prepared for the May 2027 AP CSA exam (2025 Course and Exam Description, four-unit structure).

Learning objectives

| Code | Objective |
| :-: | :-: |
| 1.4.A | Develop code for assignment statements with expressions and determine the value that is stored in the variable as a result of these statements. |
| 1.4.B | Develop code to read input. |

Students will be able to

I can trace a sequence of assignment statements and write the value of every variable after each line.

I can explain why score = score + 5 is a legal command rather than a false equation.

I can decide whether an assignment compiles, using the rules for widening, narrowing, null, and definite assignment.

I can describe how a Java program reads input and what the values look like once they are stored in variables.

How the days run

Day 1

The assignment operator: right side into left side; Tracing sequences of assignments; Initialization, definite assignment, and null

Bell ringer: The swap that does not swap (6 min)

On the board: 'This code is supposed to swap the two values so it prints 9 5. Trace it line by line and write down what it actually prints.  
int a = 5;  
int b = 9;  
a = b;  
b = a;  
System.out.println(a + " " + b);'

Debrief: Collect predictions before revealing. The output is 9 9. After a = b, the 5 that was in a is gone forever, overwritten. Then b = a reads the current value of a, which is now 9. Draw two boxes and erase the 5 physically so the class watches the value disappear. The repair needs a third box: int temp = a; a = b; b = temp;. That is the AP-expected swap pattern, and it is worth memorizing today.

Objectives and guided-notes preview (3 min)

The assignment operator: right side into left side (9 min)

The assignment operator = does exactly one thing: it evaluates the expression on the right side completely, then stores that single result in the variable on the left side.

The direction is fixed. The left side is always a variable name. The right side is always an expression. You cannot write 5 = x.

Read = as 'gets', never as 'equals'. Say it out loud that way all week: total gets total plus five.

The old value of the left-side variable is replaced and is not recoverable. If you needed it, you had to save it somewhere first, which is exactly what the swap warm-up proved.

AP exclusion: assignment used inside another expression, such as a = b = 4, is outside the scope of the exam. You will not see chained assignment on the test.

Worked example at the board (9 min)

Walk a Scanner read end to end, including what happens when the input type does not match. Do not skip the mismatch case.

Tracing sequences of assignments (9 min)

Almost every exam MCQ on this topic is a short sequence of assignments ending in a print. The skill is mechanical: one line at a time, update the table, never skip ahead.

Two variables that reference each other are where students lose points, because they carry a stale value forward one line too long.

Write the new value in the table before you read the next line. If you find yourself computing two lines at once, you are about to be wrong.

When a variable appears on both sides, evaluate the whole right side first with the old value, then write.

The classic three-step swap uses a temporary variable: save one value, overwrite it, restore from the temporary. That pattern is expected on the exam.

Initialization, definite assignment, and null (10 min)

Declaring reserves the named slot. Initializing puts a value in it for the first time. They are two separate events, and Java tracks both.

You cannot use a local variable in an expression until it has been assigned. The compiler rejects the program before it ever runs, so this is a compile error, never a run-time one.

Be precise with the wording: the 'defaults to zero' behavior applies to instance variables introduced later in the course, not to the local variables you write inside main. Locals have no default.

null is a literal meaning that no object is associated with a reference variable. String name = null; is legal because String is a reference type.

null is only valid for reference types. int count = null; and double ratio = null; are both compile errors, because a primitive must hold an actual value.

A variable holding null compiles fine. The danger comes later: calling a method on a null reference throws a NullPointerException at run time.

Misconception check: Reading = as equality instead of a command (6 min)

Reading = as equality instead of a command: pts = pts + 5 is nonsense as an equation and perfectly ordinary as an instruction: compute pts + 5, then store the result back in pts. Students who read = as 'equals' consistently mis-trace multi-step sequences. Say 'gets' out loud every time.

Stop and think, then assign homework (8 min)

Day 2

Every expression has one value and one type; Reading input

Bell ringer: retrieval on the previous day (5 min)

What does an assignment statement do, in order, right side first?

Objectives and guided-notes preview (3 min)

Every expression has one value and one type (8 min)

During execution, an expression is evaluated to produce a single value, and that value has a type determined by the operands and operators. That is why assignment works: the right side collapses to one typed value before the store happens.

int x = 3 + 4 \* 2; evaluates the right side to the single int 11, and only then assigns.

Assigning an int value to a double variable is a widening conversion and is automatic. double d = 5; stores 5.0 with no cast and no complaint.

Assigning a double value to an int variable is a narrowing conversion and is a compile error without an explicit cast. int n = 3.7; does not compile. Casting is Topic 1.5.

A comparison such as (x \> 4) is an expression too, and its value has type boolean, so it can be assigned to a boolean variable.

Combine this with Topic 1.3: widening happens after the arithmetic, so int division still truncates before the value ever reaches a double variable.

Worked walkthrough (10 min)

Show an uninitialised local variable and let the compiler refuse it. This is the difference between locals and fields.

Reading input (8 min)

Programs get more useful when the values are not hard-coded. Reading input means getting a value from outside the program and storing it in a variable with an assignment statement.

Java's standard keyboard input mechanism is the Scanner class from java.util. You create one Scanner object with new Scanner(System.in), then call methods on it to read values: an int, a double, or a word.

The result of a read is just an expression on the right side of an assignment. Everything you learned in the first four segments applies unchanged: the value comes back, it has a type, and it gets stored.

AP scope note, and it lowers the stakes: the exam recognizes Scanner as the standard input mechanism but does not test the specific method names in isolation. If Scanner appears, it is context inside a larger code segment, not a recall question.

Our editors are IDE-agnostic, so the way a value physically arrives (typed at a console, supplied by the lesson page editor, or written in as a literal while you test) is not what is being assessed. What is assessed is the value that ends up in the variable and what happens next.

Practical classroom rule: when you cannot type live input, replace the read with a literal assignment and trace from there. The rest of the program behaves identically.

Guided practice on the live lesson page (12 min)

Move to the live lesson page (Unit 1 Link Sheet, row 1.4). Students run the Java editor exercise, then work the eight Tier 2 AP practice items on assignment tracing, null with primitives, uninitialized locals, widening and narrowing, integer division stored into a double, the broken swap, valid assignment sets, and the Scanner-context item. Close with the Tier 3 Science Fair Score Tracker.

Run the 1.4 editor exercise, then edit it: comment out the initialization of one variable, run it, and read the compiler's 'might not have been initialized' message aloud.

Tier 2 trace: int val = 4; val = val \* 3; val = val - 5; val = val + val; predict the printed value (answer 14), then check with the editor.

Tier 2 compile-or-not set: decide which of String label = null; int count = null; double ratio = null; compile. Only the String line does.

Tier 2 assignment validity: for int x = 6; double y = 2.5; boolean flag = true; decide which of y = x; x = y; flag = (x \> 4); compile. The first and third do.

Tier 3 Science Fair Score Tracker Part A: trace score and bonus through all four assignments with an entered value of 50 and predict the output. The answer is 80.

Tier 3 Part C on paper: rewrite the three assignment statements so bonus doubles before the first addition, then state the new printed result, which is 90.

Play one round of the Assignment Tracing Output Predictor or the Assignment Statements Bug Hunt as the closer.

Independent practice (9 min)

Offline tracing work. Everything below runs on paper with a trace table.

Exit ticket (5 min)

Answers are below. Do not hand this page to students.

Exit ticket, with answers

1\. What is printed?  
int val = 4;  
val = val \* 3;  
val = val - 5;  
val = val + val;  
System.out.println(val);

Answer: B

2\. Which statements cause a compile error?  
I. String label = null;  
II. int count = null;  
III. double ratio = null;

Answer: D

3\. What happens when this code segment is compiled and run?  
int base;  
int height = 8;  
int area = base \* height / 2;  
System.out.println(area);

Answer: A

Traps this topic sets

Reading = as equality instead of a command. pts = pts + 5 is nonsense as an equation and perfectly ordinary as an instruction: compute pts + 5, then store the result back in pts. Students who read = as 'equals' consistently mis-trace multi-step sequences. Say 'gets' out loud every time.

The two-line swap loses a value. a = b; b = a; does not exchange the values. After the first line both variables hold b's value, and the original value of a is gone, so the second line copies that same value back. The exam-expected fix uses a temporary variable: int temp = a; a = b; b = temp;.

Assuming uninitialized locals default to zero. The zero-default rule applies to instance variables, which come later in the course, not to local variables declared inside a method. Reading an uninitialized local is caught by the compiler, so the program never runs at all. The distractor answers offer 0 and 'unpredictable value', and both are wrong.

null assigned to a primitive. null means no object is associated with a reference variable, so it is legal only for reference types such as String. int count = null; and double ratio = null; are compile errors. A primitive variable must hold an actual value of its type.

Differentiation

Support

Give pre-drawn trace tables with the variable names and line numbers already filled in, so the student only supplies values and never has to build the structure under time pressure.

Use two paper cups and a slip of paper for the swap: physically move the slips so the student sees why a third cup is required before writing any code.

Provide a one-page decision card for compile-or-not questions with four yes-or-no checks in order: is it declared, is it assigned before use, is null going into a primitive, is a double going into an int.

Stretch

Give advanced students a start value and a target value and ask them to reach it in exactly three assignment statements, each of which must use the variable on both sides. Then have a partner verify by trace table.

Ask them to construct a four-line sequence where every wrong answer a careless student could give is the value at some intermediate line, then explain how exam writers build distractors that way.

Have them write a short segment that compiles and one that fails only because of definite assignment, differing by a single character, and defend which error bucket from Topic 1.1 the failure belongs in.

Beyond-scope enrichment (not tested, no new concepts required): the classic swap can be done for int values with the XOR operator, written a ^= b; b ^= a; a ^= b;. It works because XOR is its own inverse, but it is harder to read and no faster on modern hardware. Use the temporary variable on the exam.

Homework

Trace tables: four assignment sequences on the handout, one table each, with the printed value circled and one sentence naming the line where a careless reader would stop.

Compile-or-not: eight statements to mark COMPILES or ERROR with the rule named (widening, narrowing, null on a primitive, uninitialized local).

Written explanation, three to five sentences: why does score = score + bonus work when a math teacher would call it false? Use the words evaluate, store, and replace.

Vocabulary: the eight terms with definitions in your own words, plus one code example each for widening and narrowing.

Optional online: replay the Assignment Tracing Output Predictor (Unit 1 Link Sheet, row 1.4) until you score at least five of six.

AP is a trademark of the College Board, which was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this resource.

APCSExamPrep.com Topic 1.4 teacher guide Page
